well today let's look at capella the
goat star a very prominent star visible
from where I am in Cambridge in the UK
and we'll see why here it is in the
constellation of Orga it's the brightest
star in in Orga so it's designated Alpha
with a magnitude of essentially zero
0.08 if you want to be precise makes it
one of the brightest stars in the
northern part of the
sky very much has a yellow color when
you look at it and it has this
characteristic that you can always see
it from anywhere uh any time of year in
the uh location where I live anywhere
around 52 degrees north it's a what we
call a circumpolar star and it's for
that reason that the Cambridge
astronomical Association chose it for
the name for its magazine
but circumpolar stars are those that are
near enough the pole that as the sky
rotates they never dip below the Horizon
from your viewing location and so I've
drawn a celestial sphere here and you've
got the constellations that live within
the blue hatched area those are the area
where the rotation of the sky is never
going to carry the star below the
Horizon at will go up over your head and
then might dip down towards the north
but it won't quite
disappear and a question that I often
set for my students on this one is to be
able to calculate this sort of thing and
I insist they draw this diagram which is
uh the side view of an observing
location you have the Zenith straight up
you have the celestial equator and the
north Celestial pole CE and NCP at right
angles to each other obviously and
tipped back according to your latitude
if you were at the North Pole the NCP
would be directly above your head but
the further south you go the more it
lowers towards the northern Horizon so
from where I am 52 degrees north it's 52
degrees from The Horizon to the line to
the
NCP um and that's equal to my latitude
and that's marked on the diagram and so
then what I've done is marked the
possible range of positions for capella
depending on where it is in its rotation
around the pole as the sky seems to spin
and it can be anywhere from just up
overhead there to quite low in the North
and the angle from the NCP is going to
be 90 minus the deck angle the
declination and the declination is the
angle between the line to the star and
the celestial Equator so for capella
that's 45.8 de from the C line up to the
first capella line there that's its
declination positive
45.8 and so with a little bit of
trigonometry we can work out that
the
minimum sorry the maximum altitude for
capella where I've drawn the the near
vertical line that's 83.8 degrees 90 -
52 plus
45.8 you can work that out the celestial
equator is going to be 90 minus 52 above
the Horizon and uh then you add the 45.8
you get to
Capella and 12 hours later the sky will
have spun round capella will be in its
lower position and so the offset from
the north Celestial pole downwards from
the uh 90 minus NE angle there and you
can work out that it ends up Just 7.8 DE
above the Horizon now I know I haven't
drawn it at 7.8 degrees but I I Tred to
draw these things so that they're easy
to follow rather than being absolutely
precise with the
angles anyway so what do we know about
it well 43 light years roughly the
various different meth methods of
measuring it hi paros the satellite came
out with 42.8 eight and the modern
orbital Parallax method 42.9 so pretty
much
43 it was closer to us in the
past 237,000 years ago it was just 27
light years from us and it would have
appeared very bright it's pretty bright
now um and the uh closer it is then by
the inverse Square law you will be
brighter and brighter as you approach
something you can see in the diagram
there source of light s and at a
distance R from it you're capturing one
square meter of of the light but that
light will be spread out over four
square meters at two units of distance
and over three s uh three it'll be nine
so it's the inverse Square as regards
the
intensity it turns out that this is at
least a quadruple star system there are
two yellow giant Stars each around two
and a half times the mass of the Sun but
quite highly evolved and on their way to
being Giants or even well into being
Giants they're only about
0.7 astronomical units apart so they
they orbit each other at about the
distance that Venus orbits the sun and
it only takes 104 days to go round
that's uh less than half the time that
Venus takes but of course there's a lot
more mass there involved in creating the
orbit so you can follow Kepler's thirdd
Law and it all makes sense and then
around the outside of the pair there are
two small red dwarfs H and L components
there which are orbiting each other
every 300 years um in an orbit that goes
about 10,000 astronomical units around
the outside of the whole lot so it's a
quite a complicated system and we
believe that the age of this system is
relatively young just 600 million years
or
so well that makes sense because if we
look at the two giant Stars the yellow
Giants the a star we can measure the
mass because we can see them orbiting
and use Kepler's Third Law we can get a
very accurate measure of the mass 2.56 n
solar masses and B slightly smaller at
2.8 uh
2.483 now serously the temperatures the
a star is cooler
4970 and the B Star is slightly hotter
5730 so 800 degrees or so hotter um and
that surprised me but what's going on is
that the
AAR is more highly evolved it
has more mass and so although they were
born together it's made further progress
around its life cycle than the B Star
has so you can see this track on the
right hand side here bit of the Herz
sprung Russell diagram for the capella
Giants and they would have left the main
sequence as blue hot um bclass or a
class
stars and then moved up taken the hook
swung across the yellow uh Branch there
the subgiant branch and we think that
the B Star is still on the subgiant
Branch it's not yet finished dumping
helium into its core um and is still
burning the hydrogen around uh the
remains of it in the core but mostly in
the Shell around it the AAR has got much
further and has gone right up the red
giant Branch up to the tip of the red
giant Branch undergone the helium flash
um
and triggered
the beginnings of converting helium into
carbon and oxygen and so it's then
become hotter again more energy output
because it's now using the core for
fusion and so it's moved back down and
round into the red Clump although it's
actually into the yellow colored region
there just um and it will evolve and
head on up towards the ASM totic giant
Branch as it develops a large dead inert
carbon oxygen core um so it's actively
fusing in its core at the moment but
that Fusion is helium Fusion by the
triple Alpha to carbon and on to oxygen
so um sort of all ties together that
makes sense and uh that's why with these
different evolutionary stages the
temperatures seem to be slightly the
wrong way round you would think uh more
massive star might be hotter but it's
because it's progressed so far around
the loop
now another interesting thing with this
par stars is that they are giving off
vast amounts of x-rays 10,000 times more
x-rays than the sun does was first
detected back in the 60s with rocket
flights going up above the atmosphere
carrying x-ray detectors not into orbits
just high altitude Rockets they were
able to pick up that capella is one of
the strongest sources of x-rays from the
sky um when it says it's 10,000 times
the power output of the Sun that would
be if you stood at the same distance
from it um and clearly capella is a heck
of a lot further away than the Sun so
actually the relative dose that our
atmosphere receives um is is a different
thing entirely we get a lot more actual
dose from the Sun the interesting thing
about x-rays is that they can tell you
about the atoms that are present the uh
x-rays are energetic enough to knock off
the innermost electrons of atoms and
those are bound by a very characteristic
amount of energy that allows you to
measure in the X-ray spectrum and you
can find out what elements are there
this is an extract of the X-ray Spectrum
from capella in the image here and this
guy Henry Mosley figured out what's
called Mosley's law looking at the X-ray
Spectra of the elements and uh you get
this very very nice straight line plot
if you plot the square root of the
frequency of the x-rays against Zed the
atomic number of the element and so if
you see a an emission line corresponding
to
um the x-rays coming from the innermost
shell you can read it off on here and
get the atomic number Zed or how many
protons there are in the nucleus that
are controlling the orbit of that
electron very very easily um and it's a
very good way of determining the
elements are
present so back to the story of capella
well it's known as the goat star and
associated with Amalia who was the goat
that suckled Zeus in the the story and
that's represented in the picture at the
top there but the astronomical picture
usually shows the constellation of Orga
as we have in the lower picture there
with him holding a goat and some kids
and the kids are really represented by
the little tiny triangle of three
stars that you can see just below
capella in the sky it's quite a test of
just how clear the sky is and how much
light pollution there is and so
forth but uh if we look at them on the
map you can see the star map on the left
there where capella is the bright star
in the constellation of Orga and three
little stars there
uh just to the lower right of it those
are the
kids and something very weird happens
with the one labeled with the Greek
letter E the Epsilon origi star the tip
of the three of the triangle of the kids
there every 27 years it dims down on by
a whole magnitude for a period of around
2 years um and we've got the light curve
picked up in when it was last observed
2009 to 2011 here so you can see the
green band dropping and then staying low
for a couple of years and then coming
back up but it's quite lumpy um and
that's not all down to experimental
error and just difficulties with
observation
there was actually a citizen science
project where thousands of people got
together to make observations during
that last uh Transit event and it is
believed to be the transit the passing
between us and the main primary star of
an object um but there were a lot of
different guesses about what this was it
could have been a swarm of comets or a
giant planet or all sorts of other
things but the length of time of the
eclipse and the slightly bumpy nature of
it suggest that whatever it is is not
entirely solid and the favorite
candidate for this is the planet forming
disc around a companion star so you have
the primary star very bright because
it's uh swollen up to be another of
these Yellow Giant stars and giving off
something like 80,000 times the amount
of light that the sun does it it's a
huge uh glowing Mass many times the size
of the sun nearly as big as the Earth's
orbit but then going around it is a
lesser companion that's actually too
faint for us to detect
directly which is in the process of
forming a planetary
system out of a large cloud of gas and
dust that's orbiting around it and that
gas cloud is so thick that as it passes
in front of the main Star as the
companion star goes about its 27 year
long orbit it's blocking the light from
the main uh path and dimming down our
view of the uh
brightness and we're pretty sure that
this is what's going on because infrared
telescopes have now been able to have a
look and detect the heat signature of
this warmed dust that's warmed by the
star that's embedded within it
now the other very interesting thing
that uh I came across in looking at
capella was the fact that we have a
direct image of the pair of stars and
this is it these are actual direct
images of the two large yellow giant
stars that are orbiting around each
other just the distance of Neptune apart
and when you Neptune Venus apart and
when you consider how far away these are
uh this is incredibly high
resolution now it was taken in
1995 by the coast telescope and the
coast telescope is the Cambridge Optical
aperture synthesis
telescope and this is
it it's actually a very good example of
a sort of mad scientists underground
layer you've got this bunker on the old
munition site south of Cambridge where
some of the old radio telescopes are
seen in the background
there and inside the bunker there's this
dimly lit lab with all of these amazing
uh railway lines laid out on it and lots
of mirrors and lasers firing around it's
quite an incredible site to go and have
a look at and I've been fortunate enough
to do that a few times and out of the
front of the bunker on the right hand
picture you can see the white pipes
there are four of them and those are
light pipes that go out to a set of
mirrors and you can see one of the
distant mirrors in the background in
what looks like a set of
beehives um that is a um mirror
Arrangement there are four of them and
one of the pipes goes to each they each
have a collecting mirror about half a
meter in
diameter but they can be as far as 100 m
apart and what Coast does is collects
the light sends it in down those light
pipes into the underground uh bunker
where the temperature is controlled very
carefully being underground helps with
that and it's able to bring the four
different tracks
together and bring the images not only
together but into phase with each other
so that the light travel distance from
capella or whatever we happen to be
pointing at is equalized for the four
separate mirrors even though they're
physically not connected to each other
and what this does is it gives the
effect of a single optical telescope in
terms of angular resolution with a
mirror 100 m across um whereas in fact
there are just the four half meter
mirrors and uh that that enormous
resolution you don't have the brightness
of a 100 meter mirror but you do have
the resolution because of this the size
provided you can reliably keep
everything in Phase when combining the
light so that the light signals don't
start canceling each other
out and it does that and uh literally
has little moving um mirrors mounted on
loud speakers which are vibrated by a
computer that is measuring the light
path length um and trying to bring them
into phase the whole time and it's able
to produce that absolutely stunningly uh
high resolution image not just of the
two stars as points but actually of the
surface of the Stars taking up several
pixels I think they're about eight
pixels each on the image um which is the
sort of thing that gets me very excited
um and with that I'll bring this one to
an end so thanks very much for listening
that was once around the star capella
the goat star